---
author: KShaffer
comments: true
date: 2012-06-01 08:01:09
layout: post
slug: ligeti-balinese-gamelan-and-non-standard-tuning
title: Ligeti, Balinese gamelan, and non-standard tuning
wordpress_id: 431
tags:
- gamelan
- Ligeti
- natural harmonics
- non-standard tuning
- Paul Sacher Stiftung
- sketches
- tuning
---

I found a very interesting article tucked in with one of Ligeti's old sketch notebooks today. The notebook in question is one that the Paul Sacher Stiftung has dated 1992-2001 (previously dated 1995), and which contains material for a number of pieces Ligeti was working on late in his career, including several that we're never composed, or at least completed, such as his opera, _Alice_ (in wonderland). The article I found is an obscure one from the proceedings of the International Congress on Acoustics, 1995, by Pierre Dutilleux and Thomas Ruoff, "An event recording system for the automatic transcription of music played on idiophones: application to the Gamelan Gender Wayang." The article is essentially a description of a tool developed for transcribing Balinese gamelan music, which uses differently tuned scales than Western music.





What's inserting in this article, for Ligeti and for me, is a description of the tuning system in use in the music studied. Here is their description:





> To compare the resynthesized music to the original one, it is important to know about the tuning and the spectra of genders. I [W]ayan Loceng has several sets of genders available. Each set has its own tuning. To tune a set, one proceeds as follows: one of the larger gender is first tuned. It will be the "lower larger" gender. The second larger gender is tuned a few hertz above the lower larger gender: each plate sounds about 7 Hz higher than the corresponding plate of the lower gender. When the plates are tuned, then the bamboo resonators are tuned to the fundamental frequency of the plate. Finally the smaller genders are tuned one octave above the larger ones, apart from a few hertz, to allow for shimmering. We notice that the octaves are stretched (Table 1), we neither found this information in [McPhee] nor in [Tenzer]. The values hers are derived from measurements made on a set of new genders that is rated "very good" by Loceng. [Table 1 not reproduced.]





What I find inserting here is the description of the "shimmering" effect created by having two different instruments playing the same note, but at slightly different pitches, simultaneously. The word "shimmering" appears (in several languages) commonly throughout Ligeti's sketches from this period and later, as well as one description, "the overtone saturation causes an outpour of radiance." And this technique makes it into some of his music. For example, in the opening of the Hamburg Concerto (for horn and small orchestra), the quartet of natural horns in the orchestra enter one at a time building up to a four-note chord using "natural" harmonics (that is, notes tuned differently than on the modern piano, which is more-or-less the approximate model for modern horns). After reaching this chord, woodwinds join in with the same notes, but using standard modern tuning, so each note in the chord sounds twice, with two different tunings. "Shimmering" is definitely a great word to describe the effect of the soft woodwind entrance alongside the horns here.





Earlier in Ligeti's career, he referred to the use of non-standard tuning as "dirtying" the harmony (for example, in an interview given in the early 1980s about his Horn Trio; notice that horns are frequently, though not always, involved). I'm not sure whether Ligeti is replacing the term "dirty" harmony with "shimmering" harmony here, or if shimmering is a more specific case of dirty harmony, where non-standard and standard tuning sound simultaneously for the same notes. I'll have to see about that as I look at more sketches. It is clear that this description of Balinese music did not spawn some new idea in Ligeti's music. That idea was already present - even a relatively early work like _Ramifications_ for two differently tuned string orchestras includes this and related effects. However, it seems that this article, and perhaps the talk it was based on, helped Ligeti develop his terminology here.





It is also interesting that the specific intervals generated by such a tuning scheme (listed on the table that I did not reproduce) lead to "mistuned" versions of Western whole steps and minor thirds (the intervals of the pentatonic scale), and that many of these specific intervals crop up in later Ligeti pieces, only Ligeti derives them from combinations of natural harmonics rather than the process described above. And those specific intervals pop up on all kinds of sketches from this time period as he's working on his "New Tonality" / "New Harmony." I don't know what to make of that just yet, but that's one of the main things I'll be looking at this week. Stay tuned for more updates!
