---
layout: post
title: "MOOCs and the future of liberal education"
date: 2013-05-30 15:16
comments: true
categories: 
tags:
- MOOCs
- liberal education
- higher education
- pedagogy
---

Today has been a day of renewed discussion about MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) on Twitter. [Coursera](http://coursera.org) announced 10 new universities joining its ranks, all *public* institutions. (One of these institutions is my new home-to-be, CU-Boulder.) The idea of public institutions joining forces with a company backed by venture capital has some worried. For others concerned about MOOCs or Coursera in general, it's simply the latest news to prick the same debate that's been going on for the past year or so about MOOCs (and longer for online and for-profit education more generally). And that's to say nothing of those in favor of online and for-profit education bringing "competition" to the higher-ed "market."

I have a number of conflicting thoughts and feelings about MOOCs in general. I share some of the concerns my colleagues have about university administrators (and legislatures) using MOOCs to replace in-person educational structures. I'm concerned about the potential for diminishing academic freedom and faculty ownership of pedagogical materials in these new environments. And I shudder anytime I hear the word "monetization." But I also am excited about some of the opportunities that MOOCs, done well, can afford universities and other learning communities. In particular, if the courses are actually *open* in more senses of the word than simply "open enrollment," there is great potential for both pedagogy and research.

With that in mind, I really hope that I'll have the opportunity to run a MOOC while at CU.

Unfortunately, the ambitions of non-academics and the fears of academics have often framed the MOOC discussions in terms of capital, class, employment, and ownership. I hope that we can change that. Here's how:

First, *those of us with concerns about MOOCs who are employed at MOOC-generating institutions should apply to develop a MOOC*. The best way to change what's going on is to jump in, and to do so now, while many institutions don't yet have a plan in place. I have a feeling that many institutions joining [EdX](http://edx.org) or Coursera are doing so in order not to be left behind. Some are doing so cautiously, and I'm sure that most do not have a vision for MOOCs that is both pedagogically/infrastructurally detailed and financially sustainable. However, if those who have thought about those issues in detail and with nuance are among those putting together good courses that work and serve the institution well (at least in terms of reputation, if not money), there's a better chance that they will have a seat at the table when the institution starts getting down to brass tacks. Who knows? A thoughtful faculty member might just end up as the administrator in charge of the university's MOOCs.

Second, as we are jumping into the MOOC fray, we must resist the trend simply to repackage an existing in-person course for a massive online course. Designing a course without regard to the number or kind of students, or to the medium of transmission, is bad pedagogy, and it only works on accident or if the students are independently motivated to make it work themselves. (As a proponent of [the inverted class](http://kris.shaffermusic.com/tags/inverted-classroom/), I think this is what happens in a lot of large lecture classes, but that's another discussion!) Instead of "porting" in-person classes to online media, we should *design courses that make best use of the specific course environment*, whether that is in-person or online, small, large, or "massive." For me, that means using the inverted class and inquiry-based activities for my in-person courses that *cannot be replicated online*. For MOOCs that means doing something massive and online that cannot be done in person.

I think this point is key. I've long said that small brick-and-mortar institutions (like my current employer, [CSU](http://csuniv.edu) shouldn't try and compete with MIT and Harvard (or even Trident Technical College) for online students, but instead should focus on what CSU alone can do as the only Protestant university and the main private university in the Lowcountry of S.C. To that end, I've made sure that my Musicianship courses take full advantage of the environment in which they take place (a piano/computer lab in which students are surrounded by peers and their professor), which means that they cannot find an analog, certainly not a replacement, in the online world. 

Likewise, MOOCs that take advantage of their massiveness and openness will, in my mind, be better MOOCs than those that do not. They will also pose less threat to good in-person courses. And if done right, they can support faculty research endeavors in a unique way as well. Consider a MOOC that is actually a MOOP—a massive open online *project.* Tens of thousands of students, say, build an online corpus of song analyses, which can then be computationally analyzed by the MOOP faculty member on the R1 institution's supercomputer and published online. Students can then compose written (perhaps collaborative) analyses of those statistical results in historical context, or in reference to specific exemplars. (This is, in a nutshell, the MOOP course I want to teach.) Such a "course" could never be done in person, would be of great service to the university and the professional community, and could be quite exciting to participate in, since not even the professor knows what the end result will be. And imagine the possibilities if a genetics course followed the same pattern, distributing to the massive "class" the components of a mutation problem that causes disease but has so far stumped researchers. ([This has been done](http://www.forbes.com/sites/sarikabansal/2011/09/28/crowdsourcing-gamers-solve-protein), by the way, with online video games. Why hasn't anyone done it with a "course" yet?)

The bottom line is that MOOCs are probably not the boogey man, nor the boon, that they are frequently made out to be. If they are used as an excuse for academic freedom to be limited and brick-and-mortar institutions to be closed, then education will suffer and less people will have access to good education. But if they are the impetus for faculty to improve their in-person pedagogy, to tackle new problems, and *actually* increase access to quality education, they could serve us all well. I predict that some of both will happen, that MOOCs in their current will fade away before too long, but that their effects will linger. Let's do what we can to see that those effects are as positive as possible for us, for our students, and for the future of liberal education.