---
author: KShaffer
layout: post
title: "Moving on . . ."
date: 2013-05-15 08:43
comments: true
categories: blog
share: true
tags:
- CSU
- CU Boulder
---

Some big changes are in store for me and my family. I have accepted an offer to join the music faculty at the University of Colorado Boulder. Many of the details have yet to be worked out, but we will be moving this summer, and I will begin my position there this fall.

This was a tough decision for Colleen and me to make, especially having been in Charleston only two years. There will be many things that we will miss about Charleston and CSU, but ultimately we believe this move will be the best thing for our family as a whole.

I'm excited about the new position. I will have a much lighter teaching load, which means not only more time to focus on the classes I am teaching, but more time to devote to research, my family, and service to my church during the academic year. I will also have the opportunity to teach graduate students and develop new courses, as well as continue some of the pedagogical development for first- and second-year music courses that I began at CSU. CU also has great resources to support my research—including a supercomputer that I will have access to for some of my more involved computational projects. There also seems to be a great collegiality in the theory department, and the College of Music has thriving performance and new music scenes. Though I am sad to leave behind some wonderful colleagues and students at CSU, these are exciting new possibilities for me at CU.

We are also excited at what Boulder has to offer the family. There are a number of regional orchestras in the area, as well as some high-level orchestra, opera, show, and summer festival opportunities. After talking with several contract and freelance musicians in the area (one of whom was our horn studio mate at Roosevelt), we are optimistic about the performance opportunities for Colleen. There are also good schooling options for the boys, great natural environments to explore (many of which are free), a city that is easy to navigate on foot (and bike and public transit), good public parks and libraries, and SNOW! And we know of at least one church in the area that is solid. In fact, one of my best friends (who is, sadly, leaving Boulder this summer) is an elder at that church. So we know that the family will be well cared for spiritually.

We will, of course, be leaving behind some dear friends, a wonderful church, and I will miss my fellow CSU faculty and my students. However, we are confident that taking this opportunity will be the best for the whole family in the long run, and we are excited about what the future holds. And having snow for Christmas!