---
author: KShaffer
comments: true
date: 2012-05-08 20:33:32
layout: post
slug: ligeti-the-serialist-part-1
title: Ligeti, the Serialist (part 1)
categories: [musicology]
share: true
wordpress_id: 398
tags:
- dissertation
- history
- Ligeti
- music
- Paul Sacher Stiftung
- serialism
---

_In preparation for my visit to the [Paul Sacher Stiftung](htt;P//www.paul-sacher-stiftung.ch/) in Basel, Switzerland, to study materials in the György Ligeti Collection, I am revisiting some of my [dissertation](/research/dissertation/) research. This is the first post in what will probably be a series devoted to the question of Ligeti and his relationship to the "serialist" composers of Darmstadt and Köln._

György Ligeti is often presented as an outsider to the serialist movement who infiltrated the ranks. However, my research has led me to a very different conclusion. Ligeti, for all of his originality, was a serialist composer. He worked alongside other serialists, engaged serialist questions, and worked within the framework of serialist ideology. He composed music in line with serialist aesthetics, and he wrote articles in serialist journals advancing serialist issues. Even his statements to be a non-serialist, a composer who hates all ideologies and shuns traditions, were typical serialist statements. In this post, based on part of the final chapter of my dissertation, I argue that several of Ligeti's most popular "middle-period" pieces are not the work of a rogue composer that just happened to work in Darmstadt and Köln. Rather, they are indeed serialist works.

Ligeti’s writings in the first years after his emigration to the West, many of which can be found in _Die Reihe_ or the _Darmstädter Beiträge zur neuen Musik_, deal to a significant extent with the problems facing serialist composers at the time. One of these problems is that of the nature of composition after the discovery of the “‘nature’ of the elements” of music (i.e., the parameters of pitch, duration, and loudness in relation to single tones) was made, by necessity, in the electronic studio (c.f., Eimert 1957/59, p. 9; Ligeti 1958/60, p. 62). Another is the inherent contradiction of the dictum to avoid repeating the past, which leads to an aversion both to directionally oriented functional tonality _and_ periodic (and thus to a large measure, static) figures such as ostinati (c.f., Ligeti 1960/65, p. 18; Ligeti 1966; Adorno 1966/2008, pp. 204–05). Still another is the problem of octaves forming at the intersection of serial lines (Ligeti 1958/60; Ligeti 1960/65, pp. 7–8). And lastly, the general question of musical form post-Schoenberg, post-Webern, and post-early “integral” serialism (again, c.f., Ligeti 1966; Adorno 1966/2008). In fact, Ligeti even claims in “Metamorphoses of Musical Form” (1960/66) that _Apparitions_ and _Artikulation_ are attempts to work out solutions to some of these serialist problems (pp. 14–15).

Indeed, analyses of _Apparitions_, _Artikulation_, and other works do bear out the idea that some of Ligeti’s works and compositional devices post-1956 are part of an attempt to “solve” these problems that arise in the history of serialist and post-twelve-tone music. For instance, in “Metamorphoses,” Ligeti describes one of the problems of serializing durations, such that twelve different note durations each occur an equal number of times in a work: “The problem is, that the longer a duration-interval is, the more dominating its effect, for in the series and all structures proceeding out of it only one shortest duration is available to counter-balance the longest. . . . The fact that the longer durations dominate destroys the ‘non-hierarchicalism’ that serial organization is trying to establish” (p. 13). Ligeti follows this articulation of the problem by explaining several approaches taken by composers to correct the accidental hierarchy of duration, all of which, he writes, “inescapably result in the destruction of the original fixed pre-determination of the durations,” focusing on “higher-order control systems” (p. 14). Ligeti suggests, instead, that “Irregular distribution of the elements on a statistical basis could then take the place of fixed series” (ibid.). An exemplar of this is his _Apparitions_, in which “the product of each duration-value and the number of times that it occurred in the whole structure was constant. . . . [T]he shorter a particular duration-interval, the more frequently it appeared in the context, and so many short durations were used for every long one that the sum of the short ones equalled that of the long” (ibid.).

Ligeti then goes out of his way to make sure his readers interpret his technique as one that is employed in service of _saving_ serialism, rather than _subverting _it. “It must be admitted, however, despite the fact that by this means we have succeeded in excluding another rudimentary trace of a hierarchical system, that the essential nature of the serial principle itself has here been called in question. But, as mentioned earlier, the serial principle itself has already been called into question” (ibid.).

The next two paragraphs of “Metamorphoses” similarly place _Artikulation_ firmly within serialist tradition, if not in a salvific role. Just as Stockhausen’s _Gruppen_ distinguishes between multiple “aggregate-conditions”—textures of contrasting timbre and various degrees of density—and those different conditions mix with one another and transform into each other in a way that articulates the form of the piece, so does _Artikulation_. “In my electronic piece _Artikulation_ the aspect that occupied me most was the composition of the mutual effects exercised by these ‘aggregate-conditions’ on one another. . . . The serial ordering of such behaviour-characteristics served as a basis for the erection of the form” (p. 15).

A final example can be seen in Ligeti’s description of a compositional technique employed by Henri Pousseur. “[I]n Pousseur’s Quintet for clarinet, bass clarinet, piano, violin, and cello, the basic 12-note series—borrowed from Webern’s Saxophone quartet Op 22 in homage—is shorn of its function simply by filling out each interval chromatically. The pitch-series has been transformed into a series of densities” (1960/66, p. 7). Ligeti describes this as a stage on the way towards a complete abandonment of the “pre-formation of pitches” “in favor of serial depositions of a higher order” (ibid.). Compare this with Bernard’s conclusion from his (1994) article, “Voice Leading as a Spatial Function in the Music of Ligeti”:


> [Ligeti’s] reaction to European serialism of the 1950s led him to eliminate, as far as was possible, pitch (especially pitch-_class_) and interval functions, substituting for them, respectively, a simple distinction between high and low and a scale of larger or smaller “bandwidths” (that is, intervals as vertical spans of absolute size) filled more or less densely (p. 249).


Bernard’s analysis leads him (rightly, I think) to conclude that “bandwidths”—or intervals between upper and lower boundary pitches—and density are important functional aspects of Ligeti’s music of the 1960s. However, while Bernard takes this as a “reaction” to serialism, it is clear from Ligeti’s description of some distinctly serial problems in 1960 and recent attempted solutions to those problems that the functional properties of bandwidth and density in Ligeti’s music of the 1960s are further attempts on Ligeti’s part to address these same problems, and there is a close connection between his bandwidth technique and Pousseur’s use of the series in his Quintet. We cannot speak of “a reaction to the modernist impulse found in [Ligeti’s] works of the 1950s and 1960s” (Drott 2003, p. 286) without significant qualification. In a very real sense, _Apparitions_, _Artikulation_, _Lontano_, and other works of the late 1950s and 1960s are _serialist_ works, and Ligeti is a _serialist_ composer.
